a subdued Christmas in Bethlehem
festivities are muted this year in the
occupied territories as Israel's war on
Gaza rages with Palestinian Christians
saying they too are being targeted so
what message does this show of Unity by
Palestinians convey this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm D
nauga usually bustling with visitors
from around the world Bethlehem is empty
this Christmas festivities are muted in
the occupied West Bank as Israel shows
no sign of ending its Onslaught in Gaza
Israeli bombs do not discriminate
everything and everyone in the strip is
a target from hospital hital to schools
and from mosques to churches so what
message are Palestinian Christians
sending to the World by canceling this
year's festivities in Bethlehem we'll go
to our guests in a moment but first this
report from Michael
Apple Silent Night on Christmas Eve in a
square usually packed with pilgrims and
tourists the Nativity scen showing the
baby Jesus whom Christians believe was
born in Bethlehem more than 2,000 years
ago go altered to reflect Israel's war
on Gaza we put this model as you see to
reflect the reality and we are sending a
message to the International Community
and to come here and to stand with the
Palestinian cause and to force Israel to
stop this aggression against our people
the war in Gaza Israeli raids on
Palestinian communities in the occupied
West Bank and restrictions on movement
it's a time of sorrow and frustration
and it's taking a toll on businesses
that rely on the holiday
season the situation in Bethlehem is
hard because 80% of the economy here
depends on tourism we're trying to keep
the workshop running for the workers
because they all have responsibilities
and this is all they know tourists won't
come here as long as the war goes on
it's terribly hard and
sad it's the same in the old city of
occupied East Jerusalem shops are either
shut or empty of customers the
atmosphere of this year is much
different from most years usually it's a
hive of activity with all the pilgrims
that come um but this year it's very
solemn because of the war of course and
so many of you are
pilgrims we need peace we're looking for
a peace it's a wish many Palestinian
Christians are praying for both in the
occupied West Bank and within Gaza since
the beginning of Israel's war on Gaza
several Christian facilities have been
attacked and Christians killed the
survivors have little to celebrate this
Christmas displaced and separated from
family Fadi is one of about a thousand
Palestinian Christians in
Gaza no one feels the holiday spirit
there won't be the usual Christmas
decorations or celebrations we pray to
God to end this war soon stop these
massacres
back in Bethlehem worshippers attend
midnight mass in a show of
solidarity the Cardinal of the Latin
patriarchate of Jerusalem didn't pay his
traditional visit to Gaza this year
instead his Christmas message delivered
in Bethlehem Gaza You are not alone not
abandoned Mike Lael for Inside
Story
let's now bring in our guest joining us
from Bethlehem in the occupied West Bank
is Ram Jafari Who action Aid Palestine
Communications and advocacy coordinator
in rdam the Netherlands is Frank bosan
who's an associate professor of cultural
theology at the tillberg school of
Catholic theology and from the old city
in occupied East Jerusalem we're joined
by Sammy Yousef he's the CEO of the
Latin patriarches of Jerusalem thank you
all for joining us good to be with you
on Inside Story Sammy Le in occupied
East Jerusalem tell us how you're
observing
Christmas I think uh in a very sad way I
must admit uh Christmas this year is uh
very muted uh given all the the uh
restrictions on travel given the lack of
Tourism uh given the continued uh uh
conflict in Gaza and of course the lack
of any movement on the West Bank so it
is truly one of the saddest the
Christian Christmases that we have uh
been witnessing in in in a long long
time uh Bethlehem yesterday was very sad
in many ways I think there are many
factors that affect that uh including of
course the collapse of the tourism
sector uh in particular after October
7th uh lack of Mobility people could not
go to Bethlehem I myself did not go to
Bethlehem yesterday the the checkpoints
were open for couple of hours or so uh
and of course uh the the permit
suspension uh uh so people could not uh
basically access their jobs in Israel uh
let alone the lack of any salaries uh
paid by the Palestinian Authority for
180,000 civil servants so if you look at
it from any angle that you wish not only
Gaza and the disastrous uh war that is
taking place there but also what's
happening on the West Bank also is very
critical so all that combined really I
think uh uh made the the church leaders
basically cancel all the celebrations uh
surrounding Christmas with the exception
of course of the religious ceremonies
which took place last night at the
church of the Nativity right okay let's
get the view from Bethlehem now with Ram
jaffar uh RAM every Christmas uh there's
a huge Christmas tree that's lit up in
Bethlehem this year that's not happening
the Nativity sculpture in in Bethlehem
uh has been uh put together this year
instead of that Christmas tree tell us
about that sculpture and what message
it's sending out and thanks uh for
having me yes beim is very sad this year
and um we used in beim to see the trees
are full of visitors and tourists and
the Towering
the Christmas tree are decorated but
this year it has not happened uh it is
the Palestinian Christians and the
Palestinians Muslims are here in
Bethlehem are sad and uh are um
celebrating or not or are witnessing
Christmas with pain with worry with
sorry about what it is happening in in
Gaza and West Bank many of Palestinian
Christians also here in Bethlehem have
some close relative in Gaza and some of
them lose of this their relatives in the
with Israeli strikes that Target
churches and Al Hospital in Gaza and so
the Bethlehem cannot celebrate and
sending the message to the word that we
do not to celebrate we want the world to
to to to support the ceasefire to demand
the world leaders to reach a ceasefire
to stop targeting both Muslims and
Christians people in in Gaza and West
Bank and also H they also H Palestinian
Christians feel very worried as other
Muslims because they cannot communicate
with their relatives their friends in
Gaza due to the blackout of
communication and also they suffer from
the movement restriction they cannot go
even the Christians who are living in
beem cannot go to Jerusalem and to other
places in Palestine to to meet with
their relatives to gather with their
relatives due to the Restriction due to
the stroke to the closure imposed in
different parts of the West Banks so the
message of Palestinians here is to
demand the war to H to stop this war to
demand ceasefire and to reach beast and
to achieve beace and justice for
Palestinians okay uh Frank as someone uh
from abroad how do you observe what's
going on right now in the occupied
territories and particularly I mean
every Christmas one of the most
important rituals in Palestine is the
procession of the patriarch from
Jerusalem taking place on December 24th
for Catholics now this is a tradition
that's dated back to the Ottoman Empire
and we understand this year the
procession will go on but there won't be
any festivities there won't be any
musical bands as there usually are every
year it's more of a silent procession
significant is
that well you can you can see that it is
significant because usually these kind
of rituals in Roman Catholic tradition
also in in Bethlehem on the 24th and
25th of December you see that it is like
a almost like a religious Carnival there
is music there is singing there are
beautiful decorations all over the city
people are walking processions or people
praying people singing uh Christian
Christian hints and the whole the whole
territory is buzzling with activity with
anticipation
of the Feast of the Nativity but because
of the the horrible conditions now in in
in Gaza all the celebration have to be
toned down of course not only because
there are no tourists and there are no
pilgrims to come there but also it's not
a time for for big celebration not a
time to to celebrate life and to
celebrate uh your religious tradition if
if if you are in the middle of a war
zone so of course Christmas will
continue Christmas will celebrated has
been celebrated also in in in the Gaza
in the churches of Gaza but uh of course
it's a time of mour it's a time of loss
not a time of Happiness unfortunately
while Christmas is par Excellence the
Feast of joy and peace right Samy Yousef
Christmas is a national holiday for all
Palestinians it's not just a Christian
holiday and we understand even the
Palestinian Authority considers it a
national holiday Muslims traditionally
uh attend the parades as well give us a
sense of the unity at this time of year
between the Palestinian Muslims and the
Palestinian Christians in the context of
the Gaza War certainly I mean this is uh
historically is considered a national
holiday where it is not only I mean from
a religious point of view the Christians
celebrate but but also Muslim brothers
and sisters do celebrate with us as well
and stand in in solidarity and Unity uh
and it is not only the Christmas really
that that I think signifies that Unity
uh I think in the Palestinian
territories uh you know for example the
Latin patriarchate operates a network of
uh of schools there are 44 schools that
are operated by the Latin
patriarchate uh 12 of them are in
Palestine two of them are in Gaza uh and
for the most part really the uh the
majority in Palestine at least of our
students are are non-Christian or Muslim
Students uh and thus it is the the
tradition really that these celebrations
really take place uh of both Christians
and Muslims in schools on the streets
it's sort of a national festive holiday
and that signifies really I think the
the unity U and uh that Christian
presence is not only in in education
it's in healthare Social Services uh and
it's quite a significant uh presence uh
and and thus that Christian presence
really institutional Christian Christian
presence is not a Christian presence to
serve to serve the Christians only or
exclusively tell us tell us more about
just one more question for you Samy just
tell us more about the um how look we
understand the Christians in Gaza while
they're small in number they do have an
Institutional presence and you were just
mentioning that there are two uh schools
that are run by the patriarch at there
um give us a sense of what is the
percentage right now of the Christian
Community in Gaza and how strong are
they
institutionally as far as the number of
Christians in Gaza really I mean talking
about a little under 1,000 uh uh
Christians in Gaza we started before the
war at
2017 uh and we have lost 25 people
actually uh since the beginning of the
war 17 at the sterious church the Greek
Orthodox uh uh building collapse two
people uh in our own Parish complex uh
and about five or six people due to Med
medical neglect they simply became sick
and could not uh get medical treatment
and that's when you're talking about 25
people that's about 2.5% of the
Christian population in Gaza that lost
their lives as a result and the
consequence either directly or
indirectly of the world and that is
significant for any population uh
however given that size the the
Christian presence really the
contributions in Gaza and
elsewhere in thean territories in in the
Galilee in in Jordan as well the
contributions of this the institutional
presence really in education Healthcare
and Social Services is an
unproportionate contribution uh from the
Christian uh world really to the
building of societies at large U and if
we look at Gaza for example there are
two two schools that belong to the
Catholic uh or to the Latin patriarch in
particular but there's also a rosary
sister school Under the banner of the
Catholic church and there are two other
schools Christian in nature a Baptist
school and the Greek Orthodox school so
five schools in total actually in Gaza
right and the percentage of Christian
population is no more than I would
imagine 5% combined so 95% of our
students in Gaza really are are Muslim
Students and uh you know they appreciate
the value set that this Catholic
Christian education I think brings as
part of the educational
process bring Frank let's bring in Frank
Frank let me ask you this with the
dwindling numbers of Christians in Gaza
in particular if we just focus on Gaza
for a moment and obviously I mean human
rights organizations are saying that
Israel is bombing indiscriminately and
they're bombing civilians and that
includes uh all Palestinians in Gaza but
if we specifically look at the
Christians now who say they are being
Target there their their hospitals are
being targeted as well as their churches
do you fear that the Christian Community
is at risk of extinction because of this
war well I think that the presence of of
Christians in in the Middle East per se
is uh very difficult there are a couple
of countries where Christians can live
in relative peace at the same time there
are a couple of countries in the Middle
East where the Christian presence is
already under M much pressure and this
uh this war that is now raging on in
Gaza is of course of course very bad
news for the population the already
small population of Christians in um in
Gaza and there are a couple of
significant places uh to be found there
connected to the Christian narrative
especially of course the the the church
of nativity and it would be very very
pitiful for all people in Gaz especially
for for the Christians because we have
so so so little people left there and
it's so historically and theologically
relevant to be there we have been there
for so long because it is the place
where chrisis believed to have been born
so it would be it would be a historical
trategy and andrological strategy if if
Christians would cease to exist in in
Gaz altogether okay one more for you
before I bring you to ham but do you
think that the Christian Community I
mean you speak to us from the
Netherlands from what you see in sort of
the in Europe and the Western World do
you think that the Christian Community
is speaking out enough when it comes to
the attacks against Christians in Gaza
as well as what we're seeing happen in
the occupied West Bank in terms of the
strikes and the blockades and and the
the effect of aparti there well I I
think that I think that Christians uh in
modern days have uh maybe have
forgotten uh how they should um come up
for for the brethren in in the faith so
so Christians in the west are not very
common to stand up for those who are
persecuted in other parts of the world
maybe North Korea or China or in or in
the Middle East so there is in the
Netherlands much outcry for all the
victims of the conflict on both sides uh
of the conflict but there's not so much
attention for the position of the
Christians in in in this conflict it's
not considered to be a very newsworthy
kind of of item so there is not not so
much attention to there should be more
yeah and I mean as we say uh the the
attacks and the strikes in Gaza are in
fact targeting everybody and that's
according to uh human rights
organizations as well as many people
that we've spoken to here at Al jazer uh
RAM let me bring you in the deputy mayor
of Jerusalem um earlier this week she
was giving an interview to media and she
claimed that there are no Christians or
churches in Gaza saying that they were
driven out by Hamas when you hear such
statements what does it make you think
and what's your response to that
statement uh our response is clear and I
join the the statement of your guest
there is a more than 1,000 Christians in
in Gaza and many Christians in West Bank
and uh there are churches there are
schools there are existence and U I will
remind you one of uh one of the victims
who is a musician ilham Farah who was
killed in this war by Israeli strikes
and uh also she was mourned and she was
marked and her achievements and her
music and here musical achievement was
achieved and highlighted by many
Palestinians and to show that
Palestinian Christians in Gaza are
existing and are contributing to the
building of Palestinian Society to the
building of Palestinian
education ER they are uh very respected
people and community in Gaza and they
have many achievements and they are
being targeted as other parts of
population in in Gaza and also for those
who might be wondering just tell us how
old is the Christian presence in
Gaza I don't have they are living there
for decades for for for hundreds of
years I don't have
exact year how how how long they have
been living there but they are part of
Palestinian original history in in Gaza
and they have a a good Legacy and good
history and a good achievement in
education and there there are many
Palestinian figures who contributed on
National and religious and political
level to
Palestinian history to
Palestinian civilization I mean and
another there are many for example this
inan female musician ilham Farah was one
of Palestinian Christian who is known
for her Legacy for her music for her art
for her contribution in Palestinian
community in Gaza so we cannot ignore
and and see that they do not exist they
are they exist and they have a good
Legacy and they have a an original
history there in Gaza okay uh Sammy
religious and Aid organizations have
been sending coordinates they say to the
UN as well as to Israel uh since the war
in Gaza started in October but at the
same time we've seen Israel continue to
conduct operations and continue to
strike uh religious sites as well as
hospitals you'll remember the the strike
on the Baptist Hospital earlier in the
war what is your reaction to these
places being hidden this way I think one
of great sorrow actually because indeed
we have done what we needed to do from
day one of the war uh that the
coordinates of all the the uh churches
in particular but not only churches all
the uh Catholic and non-catholic
institutions uh uh the the coordinates
were were provided to all parties uh and
not only directly to the Israeli
authorities but through the United
States through the Vatican and the holy
sea and through various mediate
mediators as well so the coordinators
are well known in many ways and uh and
it's very sad to see that not only
Christian institutions of course these
are our institutions and and we have to
care for them and and we have to ensure
that you know the safety of the people
that have taken Refuge uh in our
institutions is preserved but but the
coordinates are very well known I think
all around and it's very sad really to
see that uh you know in a particular way
not only the the the codo but also the
the two women that were killed on the
premises of the U Holy Family Church
inside the church compound additionally
I think they strike to the generator and
the uh fuel tank right next to it which
is adjacent to the Children's Home Again
60 handicapped
children are in Residence there as part
of the so let me just ask you this Sammy
if you don't mind when when your
organization sends coordinates to you
say the Israelis as well as the UN and
even the Americans what kind of response
do you get if you get a response resp at
all we do get a response and the
response is that they are aware and that
is given to the uh uh field and that
every uh every precaution will be taken
not to harm civilians and and the these
institutions uh but this is war and War
uh mistakes happen and Mis judgment
happens in wars and this is the the
response that we usually get right okay
uh Frank just to pick up on a point that
you were noting a few moments ago uh you
were talking about the Christian
presence in fact in the region and not
only in Gaza the Archbishop from the
Greek Orthodox Church in Jerusalem back
in 2021 he said that the number of
Christians immigrating from the Middle
East has reached unprecedented levels
and he called to preserve this important
component in the region in your opinion
what does The Disappearance of the
Christian element or the dwindling of
the Christian element from Palestine
mean for the country itself and also for
the region well well well I think that
um Israel and the the palestinia is is
one of the places where people from the
three aritic faith can prove that they
need one another that they can live
together with one another so if
Christians Muslims and Jews cannot find
a way to live together especially in in
Jerusalem and in Bethlehem and in nazare
the place that is so important for all
three uh monotheistic religions then
well then it it gets a bit hopeless for
the rest of the world
so Israel is in the focus point of the
international religious attention always
has been and shall for always be that
way and if one of the three would happen
to disappear Al together from from
Israel or Palestine that would mean well
that would suggest that the only way
that the three monistic relationss can
work together is just one of them
disappears or maybe even two of them
disappears and that would be such a
shame for not only uh abrahamic Faith
but for the for Humanity as a whole we
must find a way to work and live
together in peace ream can you weigh in
on this in your opinion what does the
the dwindling numbers of this religious
group in the region mean for diversity
of the region so this means that uh that
there are many political factors mainly
the occupation and the occupation
policies it the that impact the
immigration of religious and
non-religious groups and there are many
Palestinian young people
and including Muslims and Christians who
uh search and look for immigration from
Palestine and from Gaza and from West
Bank du to the limitation due to the
lack of opportunities due to the
political situation so this mean means
that uh they are affected of uh current
and continuous blade imposed in Gaza and
in West Bank and the Restriction this
means that Palestinian young people
Palestinian families who immigrate or
leaving Palestine ER they they are not
interested in Immigration to other
countries but they want to seek another
place where they could find Better
Living or better condition to live ER
this uh this is an indication for
immigration different parts of the
Palestinian Society outside
Palestine Sammy LEF will you uh give us
the final word and your final thoughts
on this
topic sure I I think uh the holy land
will be really a very sad place if the
Christian presence uh disappears uh and
I would like to concentrate on the value
of really the the Christian value set
really is one of you know forgiveness
and coexistence and and respect and love
and peace and and this message really
that is that filters through the value
set that filters through our
institutions through the services of our
institutions whether in education
Healthcare or social services that
message does not change during time of
War so even at time of war that message
Remains the Same and if that message
disappears from the scene what is the
other message that today we hear on the
streets you know one of revenge and one
of killing and one of Destruction and so
on and so forth so you need you honestly
need that message that moderating
message really to remain as part of the
Mosaic of the Holy Land the holy land
will be a very very sad place if this
Christian presence disappears and I hope
really that that that presence really is
translated into stronger institutions of
the various churches that are providing
these Services once this war is over the
day after I would like to see a stronger
Christian presence in the Holy Land
rather than a diminish presence okay on
that note we'll leave it there thank you
so much for joining usam jaar thank you
Frank Boseman we appreciate your time
and Sammy elusive thanks very much
thanks for watching you can see the
program again anytime by visiting our
website al.com for further discussion
you can go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com insidestory you can join
the conversation on X our handle is AJ
inside story from myself and the whole
team here in delha thanks for watching
by byebye for
[Music]
now